\documentclass{tufte-handout}
% \documentclass{article}
\title{Type 2 diabetes management for adult inpatients}
\author{Andrew J.\ Zimolzak, MD, MMSc}
\date{July 17, 2015}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

~\\ % makes it look better in tufte-handout class

Poor glucose control causes bad outcomes in the long term, but why
should we care about it in the relatively short-term inpatient
setting? There are many papers on bad outcomes associated with poor
control and the benefits---or sometimes lack of benefit---of ``tight
glycemic control'' in ICU patients. We won't go into those studies in
detail. There are theoretical reasons to control glucose, but also at
least one \emph{retrospective} study of hospitalized patients that
showed that hyperglycemia is associated with higher mortality
risk.\footnote{I did not read this paper, but the reference is:
  Umpierrez GE \emph{et al.} J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:978--982,
  2002.}

I and many endocrinologists think sliding scale alone does not make
sense. Why? Sugars are checked pre-meal. If the pre-lunch sugar is
250, what does it mean? It means maybe the patient ate a big breakfast
and didn't have enough insulin on board at breakfast to
compensate---in other words it's an effect of something that happened
in the past. There is nothing you can do in the present to change what
happened in the past.

If you give insulin to this patient, things might go OK. If he eats
very little lunch, though, he might become \emph{hypo}glycemic. High
sugar pre-lunch means we \emph{should have} given more insulin with
breakfast, not that we should give more insulin now. I suspect that
hypoglycemia due to sliding scale alone results in providers labeling
patients as ``brittle diabetics,'' making future providers hesitant to
do anything to treat their diabetes.

\section{What the guidelines say}

Subcutaneous insulin ``may be the most practical method'' for non-ICU
patients. ``In stable patients who are eating, orally administered
agents \emph{may} be used,'' but are not appropriate in other
circumstances.\footnote{Emphasis mine} ``The traditional regular
insulin `sliding scale' is not recommended\ldots{}. This
`retrospective' form of insulin replacement is inherently
illogical\ldots{}.'' Basal plus short or rapid acting prandial is
recommended. ``Correction insulin'' is often used
too.\footnote{ACE/ADA Task Force on Inpatient Diabetes. Consensus
  statement on inpatient diabetes and glycemic control. Diabetes Care.
  2006 Aug;29(8):1955--62.} Also, please note that premeal sugar
checks are for determining correction insulin and helping you make
changes to future dosing. Pre-\emph{bedtime} glucose check, on the
other hand, is to make sure that the glucose is not too low (and also
to help change future dosing)---this evening check is usually
\emph{not} meant as an opportunity to give more insulin.

One guideline says there are no RCTs of ``intensive glycemic control''
in non-ICU hospitalized patients, so ``based on clinical experience
and judgment,'' for noncritically ill patients treated with insulin,
premeal glucose should be <140 mg/dL, and random (postprandial)
glucose should be <180. Consider easing up if numbers are <100, and
definitely change if numbers <70.\footnote{AACE/ADA Consensus
  Statement on Inpatient Glycemic Control. Endocr Pract
  2009;15(4):1--17}

\section{Original studies of non-ICU patients}

There is an RCT\footnote{Umpierrez GE \emph{et al.} RABBIT 2 trial.
  Diabetes Care 2007;30(9):2181--6} of basal-bolus versus
sliding-scale in 130 non-ICU patients. Patients had a known diagnoses
of diabetes, were insulin-naive, and were on general medicine
services. A typical patient would be 56 years old, African-American,
A1c 8.8\%, with a 5-day hospital stay. The regimen was total daily
dose = 0.4 units/kg for glucose 140--200, or 0.5 units/kg for glucose
>200, with half of total daily dose given as glargine, and half as
glulisine divided TID (think 14 + 5 + 5 + 5, for a 70 kg person). The
study protocol also included correction dose insulin, and it provided
for up- or down-titrating the glargine and glulisine. The outcome of
this study---by design---was meeting the glycemic goal, not ``harder''
outcomes. In the basal-bolus group, 66\% met their goal of <140,
whereas in the sliding-scale group, 33\% met the goal. Secondary
endpoints of hypoglycemia and LOS were the same.

A later study\footnote{Umpierrez \emph{et al.} Diabetes Care.
  2013;36(8):2169--74.} of about 300 patients compared
basal-bolus \emph{with correction} to basal-bolus alone and to
sliding-scale alone; outcomes were similar to the first trial
mentioned above. Finally, a trial\footnote{Vellanki P \emph{et al.}
  Diabetes Care. 2015;38(4):568--74.} of 200 med/surg ward patients
compared basal-bolus \emph{with} bedtime correction insulin to
basal-bolus \emph{without} bedtime correction. There was no difference
in glycemic control.

\section{Practical notes}

In practice this will be aspart 5 units TID, glargine 14 units daily
at 17:00, for a 70 kg person. I am OK if you use regular+NPH instead
of aspart+glargine. I am also OK if you want to start people low (0.3
units/kg instead of 0.4), but doses obviously may need to be adjusted
on future hospital days depending on the level of glycemic control. I
am \emph{completely OK} with sugars < 200. Finally, note that it is
\emph{very important} to adjust this regimen for NPO patients or
anyone not taking three normal meals daily. The general idea for NPO
patients is: stop the prandial and correction dose, cut the basal in
half, and give maintenance fluids with a little dextrose, but this
brief description may not be detailed enough if you've never done this
adjustment before.

\end{document}

% LocalWords:  pre didn glycemic Umpierrez et al Clin Endocrinol Metab prandial
% LocalWords:  RCTs noncritically premeal dL AACE Endocr Pract NPO RCT A1c LOS
% LocalWords:  glargine glulisine TID titrating surg Vellanki aspart NPH ve
